File format of the Universal Dictionary of UNL Concepts 
=======================================================

All files are TAB-separated text tables. The codepage is UTF-8. 
A single column cell may contain a string or a list of strings separated by the "|" sign.
For historic and compatibility reasons strings in columns 2-5 are enclosed in quotes or braces.

Format of the UW list - dict-unl.csv
-------------------------------------

Columns left to right:
- 1 - \[ UW \]
- 2 - { alternative format of the UW, which is used internally by ETAP-3 linguistic processor system } *Not used*. 
- 3 - " list of legacy forms of the UW (history of changes) " Multiple UWs may be separated by the "|" sign.
- 4,5 - a gloss (comment and example) from Wordnet or another dictionary. Default language is English. Comments and examples in other languages must be preceded by 3-letter ISO language code followed by a colon, e.g. *rus:*. Multiple comments may be present as a list. 
- 6 - empty
- 7 - UW status (shows, whether the UW is autogenerated or written by hand) 
- 8 - UW source (initials of the editors, flags of editing procedures applied to the entry) 
- 9 - SemCor-based frequency count, as provided by Wordnet.
- 10 - Natural languge (NL), which motivates the creation of this UNL concept. If translations to different natural languages are found to be wrong (not forming good translation pairs), and there is not enough formal semantic data to judge, which of them must be corrected, the word-sense from the specified language is the reference.


Local dictionary format
-----------------------

Each file named *dict-nl-\<ISO language code\>.csv* contains links between UWs and words of a single natural language. There may be several volume files for different dialects of orthography variants of the same language.

Columns left to right:
- 1 - \[ lemma \] If this field is empty, it means that the corresponding UNL concept has no good translation into this natural language. The field can also contain a multiword expression, e.g. a technical term or an idiom. All words or expressions linked to the same UW are considered to be exact synonyms and share similar stylistic and usage restrictions.
- 2 - { links to internal dictionaries of the system(s), which support conversion of texts between UNL and this natural language. } 
- 3 - " a UW representing one of the word-senses of the word in column 1 " 
- 4,5 - a gloss (comment and example) from Wordnet or another dictionary. Only for convinience! All glosses are tied only to UWs. It should match the NL word, but it is not the official definition. If there is a gloss in the volume's natural language, it should be used here, otherwise an English gloss is allowed.
- 6 - part of speech and basic required morphological and syntactic features (such as gender). The exact contents is language specific. 
- 7 - service flags showing the source and current status of the word-UW link. It may start with a number, which is a 1-5 score reflecting credibility of the word-UW link. Higher is better.


Semantic network file format - links-unl-uw.csv
-----------------------------------------------

The links of the semantic network are stored in a three-column table. Each record resembles an RDF-triplet. However, the table format allows to add more columns with supplementary marks and comments about each entry.

Columns left to right:
- 1 - parent node (UW)
- 2 - UNL-relation corresponding to the type of the link
- 3 - daughter node (UW)
- 4 - link annotation tags 
    * "deriv" tag marks equivalence relations between UWs linked to semantically similar words with different POS tags in natural languages (a run - to run).
    * "self" tag marks equivalence relations between UWs, which relate to the same general concept except the regular "passive" transformation (beat - undergo beating).

Wordnet links file format - links-ext-wn*
-----------------------------------------

Columns left to right:
- 1 - UNL UW
- 2 - Relation between the UW and Wordnet synset (=, <, >)
- 3 - Part of speech in Wordnet
- 4 - Sense index link (see man senseidx)
- 5 - Offset pointer (see man wndb)


Ontology links file format - links-ext-sumo
-------------------------------------------

Columns left to right:
- 1 - UNL UW
- 2 - Relation between the UW and an entity of the respective ontology (= (equals), < (is_a), @ (instance), pertains_to...)
- 3 - Name of the linked class or individual.
- 4 - Optional taxonomy path, extracted from the ontology data.

